feat: add voice tracing and evaluation docs scaffold (#4368)
langchain-ai/docs: src/langsmith/trace-with-pipecat.mdx

---
title: Trace Pipecat applications
sidebarTitle: Pipecat
description: Trace Pipecat voice agents in LangSmith, including pipelines with a nested LangGraph brain.
---

[Pipecat](https://pipecat.ai/) instruments its voice pipeline with OpenTelemetry. This guide shows how to send those traces to LangSmith, including pipelines where a nested LangChain or LangGraph agent does the reasoning.

Before you start, read [Voice tracing fundamentals](/langsmith/trace-voice-fundamentals) for the conventions this guide applies: one conversation is one trace, the whole-conversation transcript and a single combined audio recording live on the root run, and the trace is marked with `ls_modality="audio"`.

For a complete implementation, see the [demo repository](https://github.com/langchain-ai/voice-agents-tracing).

<Note>
The span names and attributes described here are `pipecat-ai` internals, verified against `pipecat-ai` 1.x. They can change between versions; pin the version you test against.
</Note>

## Why you need a span processor

> Pipecat has built-in OpenTelemetry tracing, off by default. Like LiveKit, its attribute names (`transcript`, `input`, `text`, `voice_id`, and so on) aren't in the `gen_ai.*` / `langsmith.*` namespaces LangSmith reads — shipped raw, the spans arrive but transcripts and messages don't render.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pipecat has built-in OpenTelemetry tracing, off by default. Its attribute names (`transcript`, `input`, `text`, `voice_id`, and so on) aren't in the `gen_ai.*` / `langsmith.*` namespaces LangSmith reads. Shipped raw, the spans arrive but transcripts and messages don't render.
```

Do we need to compare to LiveKit on this page?

> The `LangSmithSpanProcessor` (a single file you download into your project) translates Pipecat's spans into the format LangSmith reads. It is an OTel `SpanProcessor` that **wraps** its downstream exporter: on span end it rewrites the attributes, then forwards the span. Registration order matters — if you instead add the processor as a sibling after an exporting processor, the exporter can enqueue the span before your rewrites land. So you give Pipecat's `setup_tracing` no exporter (provider only) and register this single wrapping processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `LangSmithSpanProcessor` (a single file you download into your project) translates Pipecat's spans into the format LangSmith reads. It is an OTel `SpanProcessor` that **wraps** its downstream exporter: on span end it rewrites the attributes, then forwards the span. Registration order matters: if you instead add the processor as a sibling after an exporting processor, the exporter can enqueue the span before your rewrites land. So you give Pipecat's `setup_tracing` no exporter (provider only) and register this single wrapping processor.
```

> Everything the processor doesn't recognize passes through untouched — in particular, nested LangChain/LangGraph runs, which already arrive in LangSmith's native shape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything the processor doesn't recognize passes through untouched. In particular, nested LangChain/LangGraph runs, which already arrive in LangSmith's native shape.
```

## The span taxonomy

> One conversation is one trace. Pipecat's tree is simpler than LiveKit's — five span names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One conversation is one trace. Pipecat's tree is simple with five span names:
```

OK? Or, did you want to leave the comparison in?

```text
conversation                 the whole session; the trace root; ends LAST
└── turn × N                 one user↔assistant exchange
    ├── stt                  audio → transcript
    ├── llm                  the LLM stage of the pipeline
    └── tts                  response text → audio
```

The processor reshapes these to render correctly in LangSmith:

| Span | Run kind | What it carries |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `conversation` | chain (root) | `conversation.id`, `conversation.type`. Tagged `ls_modality=audio`; renders the whole transcript and holds the audio attachment. |

> | `turn` | chain | `turn.number`, `turn.was_interrupted`. No fabricated I/O — the `llm` span beneath it carries the content. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `turn` | chain | `turn.number`, `turn.was_interrupted`. No fabricated I/O—the `llm` span beneath it carries the content. |
```

| `stt` | llm | Input `Audio for: "<transcript>"`, output the transcript. Excluded from the Messages view. |
| `llm` | configurable | Input the full message list, output the response text. Run kind is `llm` for a stock service or `chain` with a nested brain (see below). |
| `tts` | llm | Input the text as a user message, output `Generated audio for: "<text>"`. Voice is metadata. Excluded from the Messages view. |

Two structural facts make Pipecat simpler than LiveKit:

- The `conversation` span genuinely ends **last**, so the processor renders the whole-conversation transcript onto the root with no deferral machinery.
- `llm.input` carries the **entire message history every turn** (Pipecat re-sends the full context), so the latest `llm` span is a complete transcript snapshot by itself. The processor keeps that latest snapshot per trace rather than accumulating, which avoids dedup heuristics.

<Note>

> The `stt` and `tts` spans are tagged `ls_message_view_exclude=true` so the Messages view isn't polluted with `Audio for:` / `Generated audio for:` pseudo-messages. They remain visible in the trace tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stt` and `tts` spans are tagged `ls_message_view_exclude=true` so the LangSmith [Messages view](/langsmith/view-traces#messages-view) isn't polluted with `Audio for:` / `Generated audio for:` pseudo-messages. They remain visible in the trace tree.
```

> Messages are written as **singular-only** `gen_ai.prompt = {"messages": [...]}` in LangChain format — never the indexed `gen_ai.prompt.{n}.*` form, which takes precedence at ingest and silently drops `tool_calls`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages are written as **singular-only** `gen_ai.prompt = {"messages": [...]}` in LangChain format, never the indexed `gen_ai.prompt.{n}.*` form, which takes precedence at ingest and silently drops `tool_calls`.
```

```bash
export LANGSMITH_API_KEY=...
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT="https://api.smith.langchain.com/otel"
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS="x-api-key=$LANGSMITH_API_KEY,Langsmith-Project=my-voice-app"
export OPENAI_API_KEY=...              # the pipeline's STT/LLM/TTS services
# export LANGSMITH_TRACING_MODE=otel   # ONLY for the LangGraph-brain variant — see below
```

## Quickstart

### Step 1: Set up tracing and register the processor

```python
import uuid
from opentelemetry import trace
from opentelemetry.sdk.trace import TracerProvider
from pipecat.utils.tracing.setup import setup_tracing

from processor import LangSmithSpanProcessor   # the downloaded file

conversation_id = str(uuid.uuid4())

setup_tracing(service_name="my-voice-app", exporter=None, console_export=False)

span_processor = LangSmithSpanProcessor(
    llm_span_kind="llm",                          # "chain" if using a nested brain
    thread_id_provider=lambda: conversation_id,   # opt-in thread grouping
)
provider = trace.get_tracer_provider()
if isinstance(provider, TracerProvider):
    provider.add_span_processor(span_processor)
```

<Warning>

> Pass `exporter=None` to `setup_tracing`. The processor wraps the OTLP exporter itself; passing an exporter here would create a second, untranslated export path. Keep `console_export=False` too — with audio attachments in play, span dumps on stdout are enormous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass `exporter=None` to `setup_tracing`. The processor wraps the OTLP exporter itself; passing an exporter here would create a second, untranslated export path. Keep `console_export=False` too, with audio attachments, span dumps on stdout are enormous.
```

</Warning>

### Step 2: Enable span emission on the task

```python
task = PipelineTask(
    pipeline,
    enable_tracing=True,
    enable_turn_tracking=True,    # required for turn spans / was_interrupted
    conversation_id=conversation_id,
)
```

### Step 3: Attach a call recording (optional)

```python
span_processor.register_recording(
    conversation_id, str(recording_path), audio_recorder=recorder
)
```

> `recorder` is anything with a `save_recording()` method. Record at the device-write boundary (tap `write_audio_frame` on the output transport) so the WAV captures what was actually heard — agent audio truncated by barge-in never makes it in. See [recording a single combined audio file](/langsmith/trace-voice-fundamentals#record-a-single-combined-audio-file).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`recorder` is anything with a `save_recording()` method. Record at the device-write boundary (tap `write_audio_frame` on the output transport) so the WAV captures what was actually heard. Agent audio truncated by barge-in never makes it in. See [recording a single combined audio file](/langsmith/trace-voice-fundamentals#record-a-single-combined-audio-file).
```

## Use a LangGraph agent as the brain

To make an in-process LangChain or LangGraph agent the LLM stage and nest it correctly as one trace, three things matter:

> 1. **Set `LANGSMITH_TRACING_MODE=otel`.** This puts the LangSmith SDK in OTel mode, so the graph's runs emit as OTel spans through the shared provider and nest *under* Pipecat's `llm` span. Without it, they post directly to the LangSmith API as separate top-level traces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Set `LANGSMITH_TRACING_MODE=otel`.** This puts the LangSmith SDK in OTel mode, so the graph's runs emit as OTel spans through the shared provider and nest **under** Pipecat's `llm` span. Without it, they post directly to the LangSmith API as separate top-level traces.
```

> 2. **Subclass a traced service; don't use a bare `FrameProcessor`.** Pipecat's `LangchainProcessor` is a plain `FrameProcessor` and produces no `llm` span, so there'd be nothing for the graph's runs to nest under. Subclass `OpenAILLMService` and re-apply the `@traced_llm` decorator to your `_process_context` override, so the graph runs inside the `llm` span. The parent's OpenAI client is never used — only its span/metrics/frame plumbing is inherited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Subclass a traced service; don't use a bare `FrameProcessor`.** Pipecat's `LangchainProcessor` is a plain `FrameProcessor` and produces no `llm` span, so there'd be nothing for the graph's runs to nest under. Subclass `OpenAILLMService` and re-apply the `@traced_llm` decorator to your `_process_context` override, so the graph runs inside the `llm` span. The parent's OpenAI client is never used, only its span/metrics/frame plumbing is inherited.
```

> 3. **Set `llm_span_kind="chain"`.** With the graph nested inside, Pipecat's `llm` span does no inference itself — the real `llm`-kind runs are the graph's model nodes. Tagging the wrapper `llm` too would give LangSmith an LLM run nested inside another LLM run, which double-counts the conversation in the Messages view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Set `llm_span_kind="chain"`.** With the graph nested inside, Pipecat's `llm` span does no inference itself; the real `llm`-kind runs are the graph's model nodes. Tagging the wrapper `llm` too would give LangSmith an LLM run nested inside another LLM run, which double-counts the conversation in the [Messages view](/langsmith/view-traces#messages-view).
```

The resulting trace:

```text
conversation                        ← root; whole transcript + stereo WAV
└── turn × N
    ├── stt
    ├── llm                         ← chain — orchestrates the graph
    │   ├── model                   ← ChatOpenAI (llm kind; may emit tool calls)
    │   ├── tools: lookup_weather   ← tool run
    │   └── model                   ← final answer — spoken
    └── tts
```

<Note>

> Why a constructor flag rather than auto-detection: LangChain's runs are exported from LangSmith's background queue with backdated timestamps, *after* Pipecat's `llm` span has already ended — so the nested runs aren't visible when the processor handles the span. The code that builds the pipeline knows which service it wired, so it states the choice explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why a constructor flag rather than auto-detection: LangChain's runs are exported from LangSmith's background queue with backdated timestamps, **after** Pipecat's `llm` span has already ended. As a result, the nested runs aren't visible when the processor handles the span. The code that builds the pipeline knows which service it wired, so it states the choice explicitly.
```

</Note>

<Warning>
When an agent fills the LLM slot, only the final answer should be spoken, but the tool-call exchange must be persisted back into Pipecat's `LLMContext` (as OpenAI-format messages) or the model loses its tool history on later turns.
</Warning>

> ## Gotchas

Reviewer: Same thing a LiveKit page... can we update this title? Caveats, Constraints, Limitations, something along those lines.

- **`llm_span_kind` is the #1 misconfiguration.** Stock LLM service → `"llm"`. Nested brain (LangGraph or anything that emits its own LLM runs inside the stage) → `"chain"`. Getting it wrong shows up as duplicated messages in the Messages view (LLM-in-LLM) or, the other way, a trace with no LLM run at all.

> - **Forgetting `LANGSMITH_TRACING_MODE=otel`** with a LangChain/LangGraph brain makes the graph's runs appear as separate traces instead of nesting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Forgetting `LANGSMITH_TRACING_MODE=otel`** with a LangChain/LangGraph agent makes the graph's runs appear as separate traces instead of nesting.
```

Is agent ok here? Or, maybe "with LangChain/LangGraph for reasoning"?

- **Forgetting `enable_turn_tracking=True`** means no `turn` spans and no `was_interrupted`.

> - **Don't pass an exporter to `setup_tracing`** when using the processor — you'd double-export, with one copy untranslated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Don't pass an exporter to `setup_tracing`** when using the processor. This would lead to double-export, with one copy untranslated.
```

> - **Record at the playout boundary** — what was heard (post barge-in truncation), not what TTS generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Record at the playout boundary** what was heard (post barge-in truncation), not what TTS generated.
```
